The protagonist of today's story discovered ancient tombs explored secret
passages inside pyramids and recovered artifacts as old as
time itself. And he did all of this while also getting into fist fights,
foiling assassination attempts with his trustee, with dodging bullets,
amongst Egyptian ruins and facing the opposition of a French rival. Now,
at this point, it might sound rather familiar to you, but no,
we are not talking about Indiana Jones.
We don't do fictional characters here on biographics. Well, we sometimes do,
but we're pretty sly about it though.
Today's video is about Giovanni Batista Beon,
the Italian circus, strong man, a Explorer tomb radar,
early archeologists, and the father of modern Egyptology
Giovanni bat Zo.
He was born Giovanni beta ball zone on the 5th of November,
1778 in Padua, Northern Italy back then a part of the independent Republic.
Venice,
all we know of his family is that his father was a barber and that he shared a
home with 13 siblings.
He just displayed signs of rebellion and lust for adventure at a very Lee H he
was 13 when he rebelled against his father's wishes that he apprent as a barber.
And he ran away from home dragging with him,
his younger brother of just nine or was their objective. Well,
that was to reach Rome, the eternal city after days of endless walking,
they finally got there,
or so they thought they were in bologna 400 kilometers north
of Rome.
Definitely not a bad start for someone who would become famous for being an
Explorer, Giovanni or GBA as his brother used to call him.
He did not surrender three years later with the help of an aristocratic frenzy
finally made it to Rome. Yes. At last.
And then his res came true because he became a barber. I mean,
there's nothing wrong with barbers. Don't get me wrong.
I don't mean any disrespect, but it's not exactly what he wanted to do. In fact,
that's kind of why he left in the first place. So GIA about, at this point,
he had started to show an interest in the new science of hydraulic engineering,
but he did not have the occasion to put this into, to practice yet.
Then at the age of 18, his girlfriend,
she dumped him his totally rational and measured reaction to this was to take
religious vows and become a caption fryer.
It was with the monks that he first put into practice,
his love of hydraulics by building Wells and irrigation systems for the convent.
Geo batter had a, the soul and he soon had outgrown the convent life.
Quite literally,
he had become a giant of six foot seven or about two meters.
And he was almost as wide and as strong as an ox.
This was just not really very credible as a contemplative monk,
but good news is history came to the rescue because Napoleon entered Roman 1798
and dissolved all religious orders.
Giatta had the chance to join the French army that he cited with the Prussians.
Instead,
Whilst traveling Europe with the Prussian army,
GIBA realized that he was very popular at country fairs because of his size and
people. They were willing to pay to see him.
He also had perfected his hydraulic skills,
creating small shows with musical fountains and magic LANs.
At some point in the early 18 hundreds,
he had left the army and he made his way to the Netherlands and he funded his
travels with his shows.
It was after one of these shows that he had a slight misunderstanding with some
French soldiers. The details are not known except that GIA batter,
the giants apparently battered the soldiers.
That meant he had to flee to the only place in Europe when Napole alies couldn't
reach him. And that was of course, great Britain.
The first thing GBA did was change his surname from bull zone to Beon.
You see this lad, he also had brains.
The surname bull zone sounded suspiciously Spanish to untrained English ears.
And Spain was an ally of Napoleon at the time.
Then he had to ensure a livelihood for himself and for his newly weed bright
syrup, his engineering skills were not appreciated.
So GIA batter put into place plan B in 1803.
He became a circus strong man with the name of the Patagonian. Samson,
he later became known as the Roman Hercules.
The highlight of his show was the human pyramid.
During this act be Zonie would around the stage carrying 12 grown men
on his back, then Sarah would climb up onto the top of the pyramid,
waving a Crimson flag.
Other acts included juggling flags while carrying seven men or lifting a cannon
by its muzzle. The show also through today,
performance of musical glasses and a magic Lanson display proving that this
giant more intellectual ambitions than it transpired.
Beon became very popular. And he and Sarah started touring,
circuses and theaters all across Europe, from Edinburgh to Madrid,
from Lisbon to Naples,
it was during one of these travels that his life was going to change direction.
Once again,
In February of 1815, be Joni and his wife,
they were sailing back from Naples when their ship was forced to dock in Malta,
Napoleon had just fled from his Exxon in El in the British Navy.
And the Mediterranean was inspecting all suspicious vessels.
It was in mul that Bel Joni Mets by total chance,
one Mr Bagha and envy of Mohamed Ali Pasha,
the vice Roy of Egypt,
Mohamed Ali was one of those characters who treat life like an all you can eat
buffet, a Albanian origin.
He traveled to Egypt in 1801 to fight against Napoleon with his band of
mercenaries. He had quickly risen through the ranks becoming vice Roy in chiro,
formerly subordinate to the Ottoman Salton in Istanbul. But in fact,
the true ruler of the country doing sea pleased,
including keeping a vast horror of wives and concubines Andy
95 children,
in addition to single handedly contributing to the demographic growth of Egypt,
the pasture was also concerned with growing its economy.
He had undertaken a vast modernization program of Egypt's agriculture,
focusing on cash crops like cotton and tobacco that required complex irrigation
systems. So as you might imagine,
hydraulic experts were somewhat in high demand,
but Joni was at this time a successful showman,
but the Lu of his first love hydraulics, it was irresistible.
He jumped to the occasion and sold his services to baghouse claiming that he had
designed an irrigation wheel six times as efficient as the ones currently in use
in the spring of 1815 B Jonni, his wife, Sarah,
and a young Irish assistant called James cur. They landed in Cairo Cairo,
and all of Egypt at that time was a dangerous place.
Even if the pasta welcomed Europeans,
they were not seen favorably by the majority of the population.
And that included the ruling elite.
They were suspicious and rightly so of their colonial ambitions.
So two nations were particularly active in the Egyptian theater,
greatly Britain and France Dar well,
that was to extend their influence over the pasta and the country's economy.
But most of all,
it was to raid as many ancient Egyptian artifacts as possible to meet the
demands of museums and private collectors back home,
the pasta welcomed be Zonie with open arms,
but the giant found out that his wheel was not intended to raise the waters of
the mighty Nile to irrigate the desert.
Its aim was simply to feed the fountains, adoring, the vice rise harm the wheel.
It did work six times better was promised, but during its inauguration,
a prank by some of the courts resulted in it almost crushing Bellon assistant
James cur.
It was almost the final curtain for curtain when the Italian leap into the canal
and thanks to his enormous strength,
he stopped the wheel just in time the wheel.
Unfortunately it broke down marking the end of Belgium Jon's hydraulic career in
Egypt. So, well, what now?
Muhammad Ali took pity on belt Zonie and his wife and introduced them to the
British console. Sir,
Henry salt salt had been tasked by the crown to collect statues Sarov guy
and other pieces to replenish the Egyptian collection at the British museum,
which at that time was lagging behind that of their mortal rivals the Lou of
museum and Paris salt's counterpart in the French camp was cons Bernard
D nor DTI born in Teran in Northern Italy,
grati at fought alongside Napoleon against the hated Austrians.
His military pros earns him a French citizenship,
and it's given him a taste for the use of explosives muskets and the services of
cutthroats. Now I should clarify at this point that neither of these guys,
nor their employees or archeologists, let alone Egyptologists,
these were just glorified tomb, Raiders,
and art thieves with little respects or knowledge of the culture that they were
plunged.
A ring Henry Saltz was looking for a strong and resolute man who could succeed,
where DTI had failed.
He wanted someone to collect a giant bust of the Pharaoh.
Rames the SAS from the ruins of ancient thieves in Southern Egypt.
He then wanted that loaded onto a boat on the island, transported to Cairo.
The French consoles had even drilled a hole into the Kings head,
bloated it with explosives and tried to blow it apart into pieces so that it was
easier to carry. It didn't work. And the statue it remained intact.
Salt gave be Zonie a very detailed set of instructions for his recovery mission.
The last of these in instructions was don't drop it in the Nile.
Beon could not wait to face the stone giants and left the THS immediately.
He soon realized that the only way to shift the nine foot tall seven ton heavy
statue across five miles of sands was to use the same technology used by the
ancient Egyptians, a wooden sled ropes and she labor.
Now it was a known tactic employed by DTI that he would send his agents to stir
descend among the locals to hinder his rivals efforts.
This may explain why during the first days of the thieves expedition,
some of bell Zon he's hired workers, they turned against him.
The leaders of the rebels attacked him with a dagger,
the Italian giant Cooley disarmed them,
knocked them out cold and lifted them by their ankles and swung them around in
order to inflict blows on the other attackers. Now it's important.
We point out so that we at biographics,
we don't endorse this as a method of resolving trade disputes,
but we have to admit that as far as self to feds goes pretty badass.
The re it was quells. And after three weeks of hardware,
Rames the second gigantic head was sailing down river towards Cairo.
It did not drop in the Nile and escorted by the great belt.
Zonie the bust made it all the way back to England. Rames the head.
It still sits today at the British museum
In the summer of 18,
17 Beon was back in Egypt now heading for his second expedition to
unearth the legendary temple of Abu Simbel.
The colosal structure at the time was almost completely buried in sand with just
one head poking out of the sand.
Beon was escorted by two British Navy officer James Iby and Charles mangle.
These two were not really interested in ancient Egyptian architecture.
They had joined with the hope of doing what every British gentleman of that time
was expected to do. Get into a firefight with the French.
The party did not have to face VEI though,
but rather a giant dune covering the Temple's entrance.
After six weeks of constant digging under the,
the summer sun on the 1st of August 18, 17,
the three Europeans and the local laborers finally entered one of the grandest
temples of ancient times,
the first humans to do so in more than 3000 years,
Beon found out that there were no jewels mummies or statues to be seized,
but he did not leave completely empty handed.
He drafted a detailed map of the temple,
noting all measurements and proportions of note.
This is the detail that set him apart from other grave robbers.
He had a desire to acquire knowledge and understands the art architecture of
the ancient Egyptian civilization,
But he also had to make a living.
So he returned THS to look for more statues on behalf of salt and the British
museum. When he got there, he was met by a bad surprise. The site had been,
had taken over by a party of French diggers.
Mel Zonie was well known to them and he knew he'd better avoid them,
but he was spotted Dre's men had firearms.
And so he was forced to flee during the chase through the ruins of thieves,
one of the French fighters, pistol narrowly missing the giant man,
the Italian wrote to console Henry salt in Cairo things.
They were getting dangerous with him.
And as an agent of his Majesty's cons services,
he had every right to demand armed protection.
The thieves chase was not the only instance in which be Zonie had reason to fear
for his life. Once in the port of Alexandria,
he had been approached by DTIs interpreter, uh, fellow Italian,
who had told him in clear terms, if I see you around one of our sites,
our slit you your throat in another occasion,
Baldon was riding through the streets of Cairo.
When he was aggressively confronted by an Egyptian officer,
demanding passage through an alley,
the officer did not wait for an answer and delivered a blow to build Sony's
stomach. The giants. He simply did not flinch,
not being accustomed to put up with such situations.
I returned of the compliment and struck him with my whip across his shoulders.
The officer then took his pistol and shot at be Zonie,
but the Italian dodged the bullet,
and it went on to hit another soldier who was approaching him from behind,
During a later exploration to the Oasis of Al Kasar.
His two local guides tried to kill be Zon in his sleep. Once again,
he was quick to react and strangled the two assassins in self defense.
And it's at this point that we have to wonder,
did these people really see no risk in a tracking a six foot seven inch strong
man? I mean, there are risks involved with such an endeavor, but anyway, Beon,
he didn't always have the other hands ins another mission.
He had collected a monumental OS from the island of Fila on the Nile near wan,
but all of his artwork was to be in vain.
As Ravi's men seized the OSC by holding the giant a gun point.
And now let's go back to Meloni's message to Sal in August of 1817.
This is when Sal laid out his cards in reply.
He specified that be Zonie had not been employed officially by the British
governments or the British museum salt considered him to be his own private
employee. A little more than a mercenary. This made a big difference.
It made well Zon, disposable,
and his findings were private property insults hands.
The Italian was not happy,
but he continued his travels away from the dangers of thieves, his next target.
Well, that was the legendary valley of the Kings,
where he made some initial interesting discoveries. However,
at this time higher cliffs had not yet been deciphered. So in fact,
he didn't really have any idea what he had discovered. As an example,
he once stumbled into the tomb of king,
I but only noted a wall painting of 12 baboons.
Therefore he called it the tomb of the 12 monkeys. Now grace of movement,
as he might imagine was definitely not his fourth day by his own confession when
needing a rest inside the same tomb,
I sought a resting place and contrived to sit,
but when my weight bore on the body of an Egyptian,
it crushed it like a band box.
I sunk among the broken mummies with a crash of bones, rags and wooden cases.
Every step I took, I crushed a mummy in some part or other. So yes,
in just a few moments, he essentially destroyed a museum's worth of content.
As another example,
another time the Italian came across an ancient Warland ordered his Workman to
open a passage, using a sophisticated scientific instrument, a battering Ram.
His experience in the valley of the Kings was not all slapstick. However,
following hints from the local legends on the 6th of October 18, 17,
he made his greatest discovery.
So far the entrance to the tomb of SETI,
the first a richly decorated sprawling burial site, the size of St.
Paul's cathedral in London.
The monument is still also known as be Zon tomb and was described as the
cistine chapel of ancient Egypts when news reached Cairo,
Henry salt organized a tour of the site with a group of British aristocrats who
looked down on belt Zonie as a simple hired hand,
this was the end of the collaboration between the two men be Zonie realized that
salt had been taken credit for his achievements with the British establishments,
not only vast,
the console had failed to ship many Beson specimens to the British museum and
had been selling them at private auctions. Instead,
The Italian rescinded his contract with Salton continued working on his own,
adding another string of explorations under his belts.
And then on the 2nd of March,
1880 was his last great achievement having visited the pyramid at Giza belt.
Zonie became fascinated with the pyramid of Heen.
This was the second largest pyramid,
and it was generally recognized as being inaccesible following a hunch.
The Italian found secret entrances on the north side of the building and
crawling inside it.
He came across a burial chamber and toward its subterranean section to avoid
having his discovery appropriated by DTI or salt.
He quickly scrolled on a wall discovered by G Beon,
2nd of March 18, 18, but in Italian, it was like this
By 1820,
after five years of adventures Zuni and Sarah were back in London being a
showman to the core of the giant organized,
a spectacular live dissection of a mum for the Royal college of surgeons and
an exhibition of Egyptian antiquities and Piccadilly, both were very popular.
His main endeavor was to set the record straight with salt and claim the credit
that was due for his discoveries.
He wrote an accounts of his adventure entitled narratives of the operations and
recent discoveries within the pyramids, temples, tombs,
and excavations in Egypt and NUIA and of a journey to the coast of
the red.
See in search of the ancient Beese and another to the Oasis of
Jupiter,
Aman by Giovanni Patista Valon two volumes.
We're gonna assume that the first one, there is the title,
the enormously long title, the book, it had some success. It, however,
it seems that salt eventually won this dual of fame until recently
most of B Zonis recovered artifacts at the British museum were still known as
the salt collection
In the spring of 1823 B Zonie left London for another adventure.
This time he was in search of the source of the,
of Ija in west Africa and of the lost city of Tim BTU in modern day,
Mali,
the Italian was forced to take a long detour of IC because of a local war raging
in Southern Morocco. And so in November of 1823,
he landed in Benin with a British merchant, John Houston.
It was here that Beon met his ultimate fur. I ironically for such a giant,
it was a tiny creature that would succeed where cutthroats and French bullets
had failed Zuni, contracted dysentery, a bacterial infection of the bowels,
highly prevalent in tropical areas, which in severe cases make,
was death by dehydration. And this was one of those cases, feeling death,
creeping in the ones, mighty men,
Hercules entrusted an amethyst to his companion for it to be given to his wife
on the 3rd of December, 1823,
Giovanni Batista be Zon died and was buried under a tree in
GUSO. Ben
Zon is edited by part of the archeological community as a thief and an
ignorant Vandal others though,
they celebrate him as an adventurous character who laid the foundations for
modern Egyptology. Many even see him as a source of inspiration,
even as a certain inspiration, perhaps for a Raider of the lost arc,
at least according to some film critics, we know where we stand on that one,
but we'd love to hear your views on the protagonist of today's video.
Please do leave your comments below and as always like,
and subscribe and as always thank you for watching.